about.md, before:

---
#title: "About PEN"
layout: page
permalink: "/about/"
comments_repo: agorahub/pen0
comments_id: 2
---

### What Is PEN

PEN is the Agora's open source publication with the masthead of The Republic of Agora. The issuance starts at a monthly basis, and consists of two main parts: the Heros, and the Columns. The policies of drafting and publishing may vary in accordance with certain consensus by the PEN Board on behalf of the Agora community.

### How To Contribute

#### Write Columns

Please read and use the [TEMPLATE]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/columns/0000-00-00-column-template), and put your posts in the same directory.

1. Clone repo and test posts
2. Commit posts (via upload)
3. Pull request (for peer review)

#### Draft Heros

The [PEN Board](https://github.com/{{site.gh_team}}) manages this publication on behalf of the Agora community.

- Join the Agora - [agorahub/_join](https://github.com/agorahub/_join)
- Start exploring - [agorahub/_meta](https://github.com/agorahub/_meta)
- Join the Board - [@agorahub/pen](https://github.com/{{site.gh_team}})

#### Improve PEN

- [AIP-PEN Proposal Issue](https://github.com/agorahub/AIPs/issues/1)
- [AIP-PEN Project Board](https://github.com/agorahub/AIPs/projects/1)
- [New Features Waitlist](https://github.com/agorahub/pen0/issues/3)


<div style="padding:20px">
  {% include comments.html %}
</div>

Commit message:

Update sections 'PEN and PEN⓪' and 'How to Contribute' in about.md

about.md, after:

---
title: "PEN⓪"
layout: page
permalink: "/about/"
comments_repo: agorahub/pen0
comments_id: 2
---

## PEN and PEN⓪

The PEN is an open source newsroom to issue the Agora zine PEN⓪ _The Republic of Agora_. The PEN⓪ starts at a monthly basis, and consists of two main sections: the Heros, and the Columns. The policies of drafting and publishing may vary in accordance with certain consensus by the [**PEN Board**](https://github.com/{{site.gh_team}}) on behalf of the [**Agora Community**](https://github.com/agorahub).

## How to Contribute

#### Write Columns

Please follow the [**TEMPLATE**]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/columns/0000-00-00-column-template), and commit your articles in the [**_COLUMNS**](https://github.com/{{site.gh_repo}}/blob/master/_collections/_columns).

- Commit via upload is recommended
- Direct commit is enabled for editors
- Pull request is required for members
- Non-coders can post articles [**HERE**](https://github.com/{{site.gh_repo}}/issues/new)

#### Draft Heros

The PEN Board manages this publication on behalf of the Agora Community.

- Join the Agora - [**agorahub/_join**](https://github.com/agorahub/_join)
- Start exploring - [**agorahub/_meta**](https://github.com/agorahub/_meta)
- Join the Board - [**@agorahub/pen**](https://github.com/{{site.gh_team}})

#### Improve PEN

- [**AIP-PEN Proposal Issue**](https://github.com/agorahub/AIPs/issues/1)
- [**AIP-PEN Project Board**](https://github.com/agorahub/AIPs/projects/1)
- [**New Features Waitlist**](https://github.com/agorahub/pen0/issues/3)

{% include comments.html %}
